Bryan: Hello and welcome.
Today we're going to discuss
how you can improve
your app's subscription
retention strategy
using the App Store features.
I'm Bryan and I'm part of
the App Store Monetization team.
And I'll be joined by Hemant,
a developer advocate on our
App Store Commerce team.
We'll start by sharing key
insights to help you think about
managing your approach
to subscriber retention.
We'll then walk through
the features
the App Store provides
to help you improve
your subscriber retention and
provide some sample strategies
you can consider
to elevate them.
I'll then hand it over to Hemant
to discuss engineering
considerations.
So, let's get started.
For over 15 years,
the App Store has been a safe
and trusted place for people
to discover and download apps.
You can use in-app purchases
to support a variety of business
models on the App Store.
Customers trust that purchases
made through the App Store
are held to high privacy
standards,
and are encrypted
and protected
to keep their personal
information safe.
Auto-renewable subscriptions
have proven to be
a popular way for developers
to grow their business
on the App Store, as evidenced
by the continued growth
in new subscription starts
each year.
Since auto-renewable
subscriptions
are a recurring revenue model,
they have a unique customer
life cycle that require
monitoring and tracking
at all stages.
A customer must first
discover your app,
either organically
on the App Store
or through your own
marketing channels,
before downloading it
to their device.
Once in your app, you need
to acquire paid subscribers
by informing customers
of your subscription
and communicating the value
of the service.
And once they become
paying customers,
you need to ensure
they're consistently engaging
with the service
and provided with ongoing value.
While these stages are important
for scaling your business,
we've observed the most
successful subscriptions
to have thoughtful strategies
in place
to make sure they're
retaining customers longer.
The classic way to think
about this
is by imagining
your subscription service
as a leaky water bucket that's
been punctured with holes.
If you spent all of your time
and resources
filling up your bucket
or acquiring new subscribers,
you would slowly lose water,
or subscribers, over time.
However, you can help
remedy and address this
by focusing your efforts
to plug some of these holes
to effectively help retain
more of your subscribers.
And one of the big benefits
of retaining customers longer
is that it increases
your revenue.
When a customer acquired
on the App Store
stays subscribed to your app
for more than one year,
your proceeds increase from
70 to 85 percent in year two.
One of the main metrics
you can monitor
to understand your subscriber
retention is your churn rate.
Churn occurs when a customer's
subscription comes to an end
and does not auto-renew.
This can occur
for a variety of reasons,
which fall into two categories.
Voluntary, which is when
a customer chooses to cancel
their subscription themselves.
And involuntary, which occurs
when a customer doesn't intend
for their subscription to end.
Customers may voluntarily churn
from your subscription
for a variety of reasons.
For example, if your service
isn't consistently
adding new content or features,
or if it's intended
for shorter-term use.
It can also occur if a customer
is no longer able
to justify
the financial commitment.
Involuntary churn primarily
occurs when a customer
experiences a billing issue,
such as when their credit card
expires and their billing
details haven't been updated.
There are a number of factors
that can contribute
to an app's voluntary
churn rate,
such as where
a subscriber is located.
For example, we can see that
compared to the United States,
churn rates tend to be higher
in mainland China,
where the concept
of an auto-renewing payment
is less common.
Similarly, churn can vary
depending on an app's category.
Let's take a look
at the differences
between a few sample categories.
On the lower side
of the spectrum,
health and fitness apps tend
to have lower median churn rates
because customers oftentimes
commit to services
for longer periods of time
to help achieve their goals.
And music apps come
with a deep library of content
that customers can consistently
find value and engage with.
On the other hand,
some categories might see
slightly higher median churn,
like entertainment,
which customers
oftentimes churn from
when their favorite shows
have ended.
And lifestyle apps, which is
a category primarily made up
of dating apps that are
designed to no longer be needed
once a romantic goal is met.
However, involuntary churn
is not necessarily correlated
to factors
like region and category,
as it's not linked
to customer behavior.
Here you can see
the involuntary churn rates
from some of our top
worldwide apps.
As we'll discuss in a moment,
the App Store
does a number of things
on your behalf
to help combat involuntary churn
and keep these numbers low.
Keep in mind that these
data benchmarks
are directional and include
a wide range of apps.
Each subscription is unique,
and metrics
for your specific app may vary.
So now you might be wondering
how to quantify
the impact of improving
your retention.
Let's look at an example
to visualize.
This app starts out the year
with a cohort
of 10,000 subscribers.
If they observe an 85 percent
retention rate for the cohort
every month
through the end of the year,
they'll end the year
with 1,673 subscribers.
This equates to a loss of nearly
83 percent of these subscribers.
If they improve their retention
rate to 90 percent each month,
they'd end the year
with 3,487 subscribers.
And if they improved it
to 95 percent each month,
they would end the year
with 5,688 subscribers.
This means
they would end the year
with triple the subscribers
they would have had
at an 85 percent
retention rate.
While this visual
is meant to serve as a helpful
directional representation,
do note that it does not account
for every variable
in the subscriber life cycle.
Apple provides you with
a number of tools to help you
track and grow your business
on the App Store.
Within App Store Connect,
you can use Sales & Trends
to view data related to your
subscriber retention rate.
You can also download
your subscription report
to track information about
your total paid subscribers
and the subscription events
report to help understand
aggregated subscriber updates.
And App Analytics provides you
with retention benchmarks.
This can help you understand
how your specific app
performs against a cohort of
similar apps in usage retention,
which can help you directionally
understand how much time
your customers spend
engaging in your app.
Now that we've discussed
the importance of retention,
let's talk about
some of the features
the App Store offers
to help you minimize churn
and support retention.
The App Store
has a number of features
to help you retain
your subscribers for longer.
Billing retry
and billing problem message
are two tools that are
automatically initiated
for all subscriptions
and don't require
any additional
implementation work.
And billing grace period
and subscription offers
are tools you can choose
to adopt
to help amplify your subscriber
retention strategy.
Let's start with an overview
of the features
the App Store does
on your behalf.
Billing retry is a feature that
Apple automatically provides
to help you
to recover failed renewals
and prevent involuntary churn.
In the event
of a payment failure,
a customer
is automatically entered
into the billing retry state,
where they have 60 days
to recover their subscription.
During this window, Apple
attempts to collect payment
from the customer through a
number of communication methods,
such as the App Store
push notification shown here.
If the customer is recovered
within 60 days,
their subscription resumes
and they continue to accrue
their days of paid service,
which can help you increase
your proceeds to 85 percent.
Here's a visual to help
explain this further
using a customer
on a monthly subscription.
Let's say at the end
of the term,
their credit card information
on file has expired.
Without a valid payment method,
their renewal fails
and they automatically
enter the billing retry state
for up to 60 days.
It then takes the customer
10 days
to update
credit card information.
And after they've done so,
their subscription
is successfully recovered
and a new billing date
is established
on the date of recovery,
which is what all subsequent
renewal dates will be based on.
During the 60-day
billing retry window,
Apple attempts to notify
customers of their billing issue
through email,
push notification,
and an App Store banner.
If a customer selects
any of these methods,
they will be automatically taken
to their device settings
to update their payment details.
And Apple has developed
a methodology
to effectively use these
channels to notify customers
of the billing issue
at multiple points
throughout the entirety
of the 60-day window.
As you can see here,
customers are notified
by email and push notification
at multiple points
throughout the window,
while the App Store banner goes
live at the start of the period.
The billing problem message
takes the functionality
of billing retry a step further
by providing customers
in the billing retry state
a low-friction solution
to update their payment
instrument details
within the app that also
prevents involuntary churn.
If a customer tries to use
your service after entering
the billing retry state,
they will automatically
be notified of the billing error
and be prompted
to update their payment details.
This both alerts the user
of the issue
and provides a simple way
to resolve it
without needing to leave your
app and navigate to Settings.
Now that we've covered
what Apple does
to help you keep subscribers,
let's discuss features
you can implement to help
elevate your retention strategy.
Billing grace period
helps you prevent lost revenue
while improving
your involuntary churn rate.
This feature builds on the
functionality of billing retry,
allowing customers who have
encountered a billing issue
to retain access
to their subscription
while the App Store tries to
remediate the issue with them.
This means that
rather than immediately
losing access to your service,
customers can still access it
while Apple attempts to recover
the subscription on your behalf.
This can be helpful for you
since customers that resubscribe
during the grace period retain
their original renewal date,
meaning you won't accrue
any unpaid days of service.
Best of all,
billing grace period
can easily be implemented
within App Store Connect,
which Hemant will walk
you through in a moment.
Billing grace period
is also configurable
to help fit the needs
of your business.
You can apply the grace period
to all of your active
subscription plans,
or choose to exclude customers
in a free trial
so that it only applies
to those on a paid plan.
You can also choose
to set the grace period
to be 3,
16, or 28 days long.
Keep in mind that the more time
you give a customer
to resolve their billing issue,
the higher your chances will be
of reestablishing a subscription
during the grace period.
In fact, when looking
at successful subscription
recoveries over time, we see
that 40 percent of customers
correct their billing
information within three days
of the billing issue
being recognized.
The number of billing recoveries
jumps to 75 percent
within 16 days
and up to 90 percent
within 28 days
of the billing issue
being recognized.
Let's use another visual to
explain how this feature works.
As with our previous example,
the customer's credit card
information has expired,
causing the renewal to fail.
With billing grace period,
the developer has now
carved out the first 28 days
of the billing retry period
to reengage customers
without impacting billings.
During this time,
customers will still be able
to access their subscription.
It then takes
the customer 14 days
to update their
credit card information.
After they've done so, their
subscription is reestablished,
and they will remain
on the existing billing cycle
so you won't lose
any days of paid service.
We've seen developers
successfully use
billing grace period to recover
and save subscription plans.
And in the past year,
we successfully recovered
nearly 80 million
involuntarily churned
subscriptions for developers
who have enabled the billing
grace period feature.
Finally, subscription offers
can be an effective way
to retain customers for longer
and improve
your voluntary churn rate
by surfacing free content or
enticing discounts to your app.
App Store has
two distinct offer features
to help retain your customers
for longer.
Promotional offers is a feature
that allows you to give
custom cohorts of existing
or previous subscribers
a free or discounted
subscription
for a specific duration
distributed inside of your app.
And offer codes equip you
with additional flexibility
for merchandising offers both
inside and outside of your app.
There are a few
key scenarios to consider
in order to create relevant
subscription offers
that entice customers
to stay subscribed
to your service for longer.
You can use offers to save
low-engaging customers
from canceling
their subscription.
And you can also use offers
to try and reengage customers
that have already turned off
auto-renewal for your service.
Some of these customers
might still have
remaining days of service
to enjoy your subscription,
while others
might have fully churned
from the subscription already.
Let's now discuss
some strategies
to help engage customers in each
of these three scenarios.
You may have active customers
who still have
auto-renew enabled,
but are at risk of canceling
their subscription
due to low engagement
in the product.
This is a critical opportunity
to save customers
from turning off auto-renew
and churning from your service.
You can use these offers
as opportunities
to communicate
the value of your service,
or point customers
to new features and capabilities
that they may not be aware of.
You can provide them
with a free period or offer
to upgrade or downgrade them
to a different product
that may be more suitable
for their desired usage.
It's most effective
to distribute these offers
outside of your app,
such as in emails
or push notifications,
to improve your chances
of the customer seeing them.
Here's an example from the
hypothetical app Ocean Journal.
They've sent an email
to a low-engaged customer
with an offer to enjoy the next
month of service for free.
They've contextualized
the message
with an announcement
of a new subscription feature
that allows customers
to access content offline.
If a customer has already
turned off auto-renew
but still has access
to your subscription,
you can surface offers
to attempt to prevent them
from fully churning
and losing service.
Many customers find themselves
in this scenario,
as they tend to cancel
their plans in advance
of their renewal date.
In fact, over 90 percent
of customers cancel plans
with at least two days
of service remaining,
and many continue
to return to the app
while throughout
the remainder of the term.
You can leverage this window
to provide offers
for discounted service that
motivate customers to continue
subscribing while showcasing
the value of your subscription.
Consider distributing
these offers in your app
to reach the customers
who are still utilizing aspects
of your subscription.
Here's another example
from Ocean Journal.
They're presenting an offer
for 50 percent off
of a customer's
next month of service
in the home screen of their app.
In the message,
they've highlighted
the customer's progress
towards their monthly surfing
goal, and clearly communicated
the subscription's impact
in helping them achieve it.
In the event that
a customer fully churns
from your subscription and loses
access to your service,
you can use subscription offers
to try and win them back.
However, it's important
to determine the optimal time
after a customer churns
to begin providing discounts
for your specific app.
Keep in mind
that providing discounts
as soon as your customer's
subscription ends
may lead to unintended behavior,
as users may cancel their plans
in order to receive discounts.
Once you begin
distributing these offers,
consider giving deeper discounts
as the amount of time churned
continues to grow.
And since these customers are
likely no longer using your app,
the most effective method
to distribute these offers
are through emails
and push notifications.
Here's how this might look
if Ocean Journal
surfaced preexisting customers
with an offer.
They're using push notifications
to distribute an offer
for 50 percent off the next
three months of service.
If the customer dismisses it,
they can consider sending
another offer in the future.
But they should avoid sending
the customer too many offers
to prevent the behavior
from feeling spammy.
So billing retry,
billing problem message,
billing grace period,
and subscription offers
are some of the ways
the App Store
helps retain
your customers for longer.
Now that we know
what these features are
and how to use them,
Hemant will discuss how
to successfully engineer them.
Hemant: Thank you, Bryan.
In this section, we'll discuss
the best practices you'll need
to consider when implementing
App Store features
to prevent churn and retain
subscribers for your app.
Before the subscription renewal,
the App Store
checks for any billing issues
that might delay or prevent
the subscription
from being
automatically renewed.
These checks include ensuring
a customer has an active
and valid payment method on file
to process
the subscription renewal.
In case they do not,
the App Store proactively
notifies the customer to update
the payment method on file
before the subscription renewal.
To deter fraud, the App Store
conducts fraud and risk checks
on the customer profile
and payment method on file.
And lastly, when applicable,
the customers are also notified
about upcoming
subscription renewal.
In addition to all these checks,
App Store provides a set
of features to prevent churn
and retain subscribers,
which Bryan covered earlier.
Let's begin by taking a look
at the best practices
you need to consider when
implementing these features,
starting with features
such as billing retry
and billing problem message.
These features are a platform
benefit and are enabled
for you by default to prevent
involuntary churn.
A subscription automatically
enters a billing retry period
for 60 days when it fails
to renew due to payment issue.
During this period,
Apple attempts
to recover a subscription.
And depending upon
the scenarios,
the subscription status
may change.
Let's cover scenarios
that you need to account for
when a subscription
is in a billing retry period.
Here, we have a customer whose
subscription failed to renew
due to payment issue and is in
a billing retry period.
To identify a subscription
in billing retry
and to stop providing service,
you can use the StoreKit
renewal state property
inBillingRetryPeriod.
This allows you to identify
subscription status
and determine access to service
without a need for a server.
However, to receive updated
subscription status in real time
you can choose to enable
App Store server notifications.
Once enabled, you'll receive
a notification type
DID_FAIL_TO_RENEW when
a customer enters billing retry.
Now, a subscription in billing
retry can be recovered anytime
over the period of 60 days.
And once recovered,
you need to start providing
service to the customer.
So in this scenario,
consider the customer
has updated their payment method
on file,
which renewed
their subscription.
Once a subscription
is recovered,
the renewal state will be
updated to subscribed.
And you'll receive notification
DID_RENEW with subtype
BILLING_RECOVERY
indicating a successful renewal.
Since the subscription
is recovered
in the billing retry period,
you'll have a new subscription
expiration date.
Now, for a scenario
when the App Store reaches
the billing retry limit
and is unable to recover
the subscription,
the subscription expires
and the renewal state
will be updated to EXPIRED.
And you'll receive App Store
server notification EXPIRED
with subtype BILLING_RETRY.
In addition,
some of the best practices
you need to consider
for subscription
in billing retry include:
is to not merchandise
a customer if they are
already in billing retry
since the App Store
is in process of recovering
the subscription.
This is also important if you
provide service cross platform.
As Bryan mentioned earlier,
if the customer is recovered
within 60 days,
they continue to accrue
their days of paid service,
which can help you increase
your proceeds to 85 percent.
It's important to know
that the customer can opt out
of billing retry by cancelling
the subscription.
In this case, App Store stops
the billing retry attempts.
A subscription can also enter
a billing retry when you remove
an auto-renewal product
from sale.
This subscription
is not recovered
unless the auto-renewal product
is cleared for sale again
within 60 days.
You can use the StoreKit
property expirationReason
and expirationIntent
on a server
to identify subscriptions
in this state.
And to summarize,
you can validate your app
and server implementation using
App Store sandbox
for a subscription
in the billing retry state.
To further accelerate
the subscription recovery,
App Store sends
a billing problem message
to customers in app to help
them resolve the issue.
You can choose to defer
the billing problem message
for a customer if you
do not want to interrupt
their specific app experience.
To do so, you can use
StoreKit Message API,
property .reason
and value .billingIssue.
For more information,
see WWDC23 sessions
"What's New in StoreKit 2
and StoreKit Testing in Xcode"
and "Explore testing
in-app purchases."
Now, let's discuss the feature
you as a developer can adopt
to handle the impact
of involuntary
and voluntary churn.
We'll start by looking into
the billing grace period.
To enable grace period
configuration for your app,
navigate to your
App Subscription section
in App Store Connect.
This will open up a dialog
which will allow you
to configure
a billing grace period
for your app.
You can then select from
available grace period duration.
You can also select
the eligibility
for the billing grace period
and select the environment.
You can choose to enable it
first in the sandbox
or choose to enable it
in both sandbox and production.
Your selected configuration will
be visible in App Store Connect
once you confirm.
Once enabled,
a billing grace period begins
when subscription
fails to renew.
Here are all
the billing retry scenarios
that we previously discussed.
When you enable
the billing grace period,
you need to account
for additional scenarios
in the subscription life cycle.
Now, let's illustrate
the scenario for the customer
after enabling
the billing grace period.
Here, since the grace period
is enabled, the customer
will retain full access
to your app's paid content
while Apple attempts
to recover the subscription.
To identify a subscription
in a billing grace period
and to continue providing
service,
the renewal state
will be updated to inGracePeriod
and you'll receive notification
type DID_FAIL_TO_RENEW
along with subtype
GRACE_PERIOD.
A customer can recover
in the billing grace period
with no interruption
to your paid days of service
and the subscription expiration
date remains the same.
Once the customer recovers,
the renewal state
will be updated to subscribed,
and you'll receive notification
DID_RENEW
with subtype BILLING_RECOVERY.
A customer may not recover
in the billing grace period,
after which you can stop
providing them the service
as the customer enters
in billing retry.
And the renewal state
will be updated to
inBillingRetryPeriod
and you'll receive notification
GRACE_PERIOD_EXPIRED.
Similarly, these additional
use cases can also be validated
in the App Store sandbox
for both your app and server,
when you enable
a billing grace period.
Lastly, now let's discuss
subscription offers.
We'll take a look
at these two scenarios.
And I'm going to cover things
you need to consider
when implementing
a relevant subscription offer
into your app and server.
In this first scenario,
we try to reengage a customer
who has turned off auto-renewal,
but still has remaining
days of service
to enjoy your app.
Here we are using
promotional offers
as our tool to create
subscription offers
for the cohort
of existing subscribers.
To identify subscription
in this cohort, you can use
StoreKit "RenewalStateProperty
= subscribed"
and renewal info property
"willAutoRenew = false."
On the server side, you can use
Subscription Status API
properties "status = 1"
and "autoRenewStatus = 0."
In addition, if you have
App Store Server Notification
enabled,
you'll receive notification type
DID_CHANGE_RENEWAL_STATUS
and subtype
AUTO_RENEW_DISABLED
in real time when the customer
turns off
the subscription renewal.
Now, some of the best practices
you need to consider
when implementing
a promotional offer
is to merchandise the offer
details to the customer
using the promotionalOffers
property of StoreKit,
instead of hardcoding
or fetching it from your server.
For promotional offers, it's
important to send a signature
at the time of purchase,
for example, right before
merchandising offer.
This will help you to ensure
that you have
a recent time stamp
and are using up-to-date
offer configuration.
To streamline the process
and to help you
generate signature,
we have introduced
App Store Server Library,
which provides you
with a framework
to securely generate
signature on your server.
In addition,
it helps you easily adopt
App Store Server API
and notifications.
To identify promotional offer
redemption, you can use
JWSTransaction, which will
contain offerType value = 2
and the offerIdentifier.
The offerIdentifier
will contain the value
which you have configured
in App Store Connect
when setting up
the promotional offer.
You'll receive
the notification type
OFFER_REDEEMED in real time
when the customer redeems
an offer along with
all applicable subtypes.
For more information
on promotional offer
best practices,
watch the WWDC sessions
"Meet App Store Server Library"
and "Subscription offers
best practices."
Now, for a scenario when
a customer is churned
and may not be
actively using your app.
To identify subscribers
in this cohort,
you can use StoreKit:
RenewalState property = expired
and renewal info property:
willAutoRenew = false.
On the server side, you can use
Subscription Status
API properties "status = 2"
and "autoRenewStatus = 0."
On App Store Server
Notification,
you'll receive notification type
EXPIRED
and subtype VOLUNTARY
when the subscription expires.
For this scenario,
we are using offer code
as a tool to win back
the customer for two reasons.
First, it will help you
merchandise and provide offers
to customers within your app
or outside the app.
Second, you can embed
the offer code deep link
in push notification or emails
to begin the offer redemption
flow and win back the customer.
For more information
on offer code implementation
and best practices,
watch our Tech Talks
"Subscription Offer Codes"
and "Optimize subscription
for success: acquisition."
Now, the App Store provides you
with all the helpful transaction
information on the device
and server that enables you
to entitle customers accurately
and provide service.
Expanding on that,
we introduce new properties
in transaction information
to help you know
your App Store product
and offer configuration,
which includes properties
such as price, currency,
and offerDiscountType.
You can leverage
these properties to understand
your offer redemption details.
You can also leverage
the recentSubscriptionStartDate
property
to calculate the total period
the customer was subscribed
to a subscription.
This will help you get an idea
about customer loyalty
and make the decision
to provide subscription offer.
Let's take an example.
A customer purchased a monthly
subscription on January 25
and continuously renewed
over a monthly period.
However, on December 5,
the customer decided
to disable the subscription
renewal, which may result
in the subscription getting
churned on December 25.
We'll consider this period
as a safe period.
During the period, you can make
a proactive decision
to present a subscription offer
to the customer
based on their length
of the subscribed period.
If the customer chooses
to accept the offer,
they will renew
on December 25.
To summarize,
Apple initiated features
like billing retry
and billing problem message --
and in addition,
adopting features
like billing grace period
and subscription offers --
will help you prevent churn and
retain subscribers for your app.
For more information
on getting started
with subscriptions or details
about our subscription tools,
you can find auto-enable
subscription documentation
on developer.apple.com.
This documentation
contains all resources
and applicable links
for your reference in one place.